# FINAL PROPOSAL

## Topic : 

Understanding the contributing factor for vehicle crashes dataset of New York city

## Historical Background :

Every day, people are gravely injured in car accidents. According to the US Department of Transportation, 943 persons were killed in car accidents in New York state in 2018. **This equates to about three persons per day**. Many of these mishaps could have been avoided totally. Our personal injury lawyers at Rosenbaum & Rosenbaum, P.C. feel that understanding New York City vehicle accident data is critical to keeping people safe on the roadways.According to the New York Police Department, there were 7,456 motor vehicle accidents in June 2020 alone–at a time when the entire city remained largely shut down in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. 

NYPD data provides a monthly statistical analysis of the most common causes of NYC car accidents. Some of the common causes of NYC car accidents for June 2016 include:

- Driver distraction (2,127 crashes)
- Following too closely (577 crashes)
- Failure to yield the right of way (484 crashes)
- Improper passing or lane usage (311 crashes)
- Speeding (293 crashes)
- Drunk driving or illegal drug use (138 crashes)

## Problem Statement : 

Understanding the vehicle crashes dataset of New York and develop a multiclass classifier to classify the contributing factor for those crashes

## About the data :

The Motor Vehicle Collisions vehicle table contains details on each vehicle involved in the crash.**Each row represents a motor vehicle involved in a crash**. The data in this table goes back to April 2016 when crash reporting switched to an electronic system.

The Motor Vehicle Collisions data tables contain information from all police reported motor vehicle collisions in NYC. The police report (MV104-AN) is required to be filled out for collisions where someone is injured or killed, or where there is at least $1000 worth of damage.

## Data Source :

https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Public-Safety/Motor-Vehicle-Collisions-Vehicles/bm4k-52h4
Size    : 114.4MB
Rows    : 3.7M
Columns : 25
Each row represents motor vehicle invloved in a crash.

## Data Description :
Column Name Description

- UNIQUE_ID Unique record code generated by system.
- COLLISION_ID Crash identification code. Foreign Key, matches unique_id from the Crash table.
- CRASH_DATE Occurrence date of collision
- CRASH_TIME Occurrence time of collision
- VEHICLE_ID Vehicle identification code assigned by system
- STATE_REGISTRATION State where vehicle is registered.
- VEHICLE_TYPE Type of vehicle based on the selected vehicle category
- VEHICLE_MAKE Vehicle make
- VEHICLE_MODEL Vehicle model
- VEHICLE_YEAR Year the vehicle was manufactured
- TRAVEL_DIRECTION Direction vehicle was traveling
- VEHICLE_OCCUPANTS Number of vehicle occupants
- DRIVER_SEX Gender of driver
- DRIVER_LICENSE_STATUS License, permit, unlicensed
- DRIVER_LICENSE_JURISDICTION State where driver license was issued.
- PRE_CRASH Pre-crash action: Going straight, making right turn, passing, backing, etc.
- POINT_OF_IMPACT Location on the vehicle of the initial point of impact
- VEHICLE_DAMAGE Location on the vehicle where most of the damage occurred
- VEHICLE_DAMAGE_1 Additional damage locations on the vehicle
- VEHICLE_DAMAGE_2 Additional damage locations on the vehicle
- VEHICLE_DAMAGE_3 Additional damage locations on the vehicle
- PUBLIC_PROPERTY_DAMAGE Public property damaged (Yes or No)
- PUBLIC_PROPERTY_DAMAGE_TYPE Type of public property damaged (ex. Sign, fence, light post, etc.)
- CONTRIBUTING_FACTOR_1 Factors contributing to the collision for designated vehicle
- CONTRIBUTING_FACTOR_2 Factors contributing to the collision for designated vehicle

## Analysis :
### Data Cleaning and Engineering :
#### Observations :

- There are very few rows like unique_id, collision_id, date and time with no missing data.
- Columns such as VEHICLE_MODEL, VEHICLE_DAMAGE_1, VEHICLE_DAMAGE_2, VEHICLE_DAMAGE_3, PUBLIC_PROPERTY_DAMAGE_TYPE have more than 65% of missing values.
- Reduced the number of rows with values 'Unspecified' by 49.8%.
- More than 90% of the data has 'No' that means in more than 90% of crashes there was no property damage.
- Most of the damages have occured at the front end of the car compared to other parts.
- A great portion of cars that were involved in an accident were either going straight or were parked.
- About 95% of people who were involved in an accident are licensed.
- Majority of accidents were caused by Males.
- In 80% of the cases there is only one person in the vehicle which was involved in an accident.
- Droping the unnecessary columns
  - UNIQUE_ID, COLLISION_ID, and VEHICLE_ID as they are unique and don't add value for this analysis.
  - CRASH_DATE, CRASH_TIME, VEHICLE_YEAR, CONTRIBUTING_FACTOR_2, and VEHICLE_MAKE as we extracted the main information from them.
  - VEHICLE_MODEL, PUBLIC_PROPERTY_DAMAGE, PUBLIC_PROPERTY_DAMAGE_TYPE as most of the data is missing.
  - STATE_REGISTRATION, DRIVER_LICENSE_STATUS, TRAVEL_DIRECTION, and DRIVER_LICENSE_JURISDICTION as data is highly skewed
  - VEHICLE_DAMAGE_cleaned as POINT_OF_IMPACT and VEHICLE_DAMAGE_cleaned very highly correlated.

### EDA :
#### Observations :

- I observed that during the years 2017, 2018 there was an average of 175,000 accident.
- There is a decrease in the number of accidents in 2020 and 2021 due to the pandemic.
- I observed that their was a sudden spike in the number of accidents in the months of May and June.
- Contrast to common conception most of the accidents took place in the afternoon.
- Lack of attention was the major contributor for accidents followed by following too closely, not DUI or DWI.
- For the accidents having damages on the front end the driver was going straight.
- For the accidents having damages on the back end the driver was mostly backing the car.
- When there is only one person in the vehicle lack of attention and over speeding were the causes for accidents.
- Compared to females, men cause a lot of accidents due to distraction.

## What is your issue of interest (provide sufficient background information)?
Understanding the New York automobile collision dataset and developing a multiclass classifier to categorize the main factors for those collisions.
## Why is this issue important to you and/or to others?
## What questions do you have in mind and would like to answer?
## Where do you get the data to analyze and help answer your questions (creditability of source, quality of data, size of data, attributes of data. etc.)?
## What will be your unit of analysis (for example, patient, organization, or country)? Roughly how many units (observations) do you expect to analyze?
## What variables/measures do you plan to use in your analysis (variables should be tied to the questions in #3)?
## What kinds of techniques/models do you plan to use (for example, clustering, NLP, ARIMA, etc.)?
## How do you plan to develop/apply ML and how you evaluate/compare the performance of the models?
## What outcomes do you intend to achieve (better understanding of problems, tools to help solve problems, predictive analytics with practicle applications, etc)?
Please use the proposal.md profile for the proposal. Write it in your personal account's repository. After completion and before submission, refresh the contents in the class organization using "Fetch Upstream". Submit the link to the repository in the class organization.

