For your project proposal, please use the following questions to guide your writing:

#1. What is your issue of interest (provide sufficient background information)? Understanding the vehicle crashes dataset of New York and develop a multiclass classifier to classify the contributing factor for those crashes

Each vehicle involved in the collision is listed in the Motor Vehicle Collisions vehicle table. Each row depicts a car that was involved in a collision. The information in this table is from April 2016, when the crash reporting system was upgraded to an electronic system.

All police-reported motor vehicle collisions in NYC are included in the Motor Vehicle Collisions data tables. For collisions in which someone is hurt or killed, or if there is at least $1000 in damage, the police report (MV104-AN) must be completed. #2. Why is this issue important to you and/or to others? Identifying the reasons of cause we can take precautions inorder to prevent something from happening. #3. What questions do you have in mind and would like to answer? Identifying the collision factor, reasons, time of incident, etc. #4. Where do you get the data to analyze and help answer your questions (creditability of source, quality of data, size of data, attributes of data. etc.)? Dataset link: https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Public-Safety/Motor-Vehicle-Collisions-Vehicles/bm4k-52h4 rows : 3.5 Million Rows : 25 Size : 800MB It has some NULL values. #5. What will be your unit of analysis (for example, patient, organization, or country)? Roughly how many units (observations) do you expect to analyze? contributing faactor is my unit of analysis. UNIQUE_ID Unique record code generated by system. COLLISION_ID Crash identification code. Foreign Key, matches unique_id from the Crash table. CRASH_DATE Occurrence date of collision CRASH_TIME Occurrence time of collision VEHICLE_ID Vehicle identification code assigned by system STATE_REGISTRATION State where vehicle is registered. VEHICLE_TYPE Type of vehicle based on the selected vehicle category VEHICLE_MAKE Vehicle make VEHICLE_MODEL Vehicle model VEHICLE_YEAR Year the vehicle was manufactured TRAVEL_DIRECTION Direction vehicle was traveling VEHICLE_OCCUPANTS Number of vehicle occupants DRIVER_SEX Gender of driver DRIVER_LICENSE_STATUS License, permit, unlicensed DRIVER_LICENSE_JURISDICTION State where driver license was issued. PRE_CRASH Pre-crash action: Going straight, making right turn, passing, backing, etc. POINT_OF_IMPACT Location on the vehicle of the initial point of impact VEHICLE_DAMAGE Location on the vehicle where most of the damage occurred VEHICLE_DAMAGE_1 Additional damage locations on the vehicle VEHICLE_DAMAGE_2 Additional damage locations on the vehicle VEHICLE_DAMAGE_3 Additional damage locations on the vehicle PUBLIC_PROPERTY_DAMAGE Public property damaged (Yes or No) PUBLIC_PROPERTY_DAMAGE_TYPE Type of public property damaged (ex. Sign, fence, light post, etc.) CONTRIBUTING_FACTOR_1 Factors contributing to the collision for designated vehicle CONTRIBUTING_FACTOR_2 Factors contributing to the collision for designated vehicle

Will check for the unnecessary columns and then try to replace them with mean if NULL values are present or take certaina ctions.

#6. What variables/measures do you plan to use in your analysis (variables should be tied to the questions in #3)? Columns such as VEHICLE_MODEL, VEHICLE_DAMAGE_1, VEHICLE_DAMAGE_2, VEHICLE_DAMAGE_3, PUBLIC_PROPERTY_DAMAGE_TYPE have more than 65% of missing values. Except these I intend to use all the columns for analysis.

#7. What kinds of techniques/models do you plan to use (for example, clustering, NLP, ARIMA, etc.)? Decision tree, Logistic Regression, Random Forest etc.

#8. How do you plan to develop/apply ML and how you evaluate/compare the performance of the models? Based on accuracy and performance of the model I will decide one.

#9. What outcomes do you intend to achieve (better understanding of problems, tools to help solve problems, predictive analytics with practicle applications, etc)? Predictive analysis. Please use the proposal.md profile for the proposal. Write it in your personal account's repository. After completion and before submission, refresh the contents in the class organization using "Fetch Upstream". Submit the link to the repository in the class organization.

Please make sure it is well formated and styled using Markdown.

We will randomly select a few proposals to walk through during the online session. If you are selected, you will be sharing your proposal and the class will provide feedback.
